Somewhere in there is an island of
stable, very heavy elements.
Californium. You You slam California
into a different other ones. Yeah,
exactly. You're slamming unstable
elements into other unstable elements.
If you slam California into
Alabama, you definitely going to come up
with something
unstable. God damn. I tell you, I can't
believe they came over here like they
did. M is there anything that smells
good that will also kill you? Ooh, I'm
sure. Or has that gene pool been removed
from our species long ago? Hilarious.
[Music]
This is Star Talk. Neil deGrasse Tyson.
You're a personal astrophysicist. We're
doing cosmic queries today. That means
Chuck is in the house. Chuck. Hey. Hey.
All right. You got the queries. I do
right here. And where they come from?
Uh, they come from our people at
Patreon. Nice. The supporters who give
us money and that is why we like them.
No, we like them because they're
curious. Well, that that right. Yes,
that that's why we like them.
So, today it's going to be all about
chemistry. Nice. We love chemistry. I
know a little bit of chemistry, but not
enough to do a cosmic queries on it. And
I know enough to listen.
We We comb the landscape for a chemist
and we've went to the top shelf. Yes.
Top shelf. And we found Kate the
chemist. Yes. The the Macallen 30. That
was the 30-year The 30-year-old scotch
of chemist, baby. Top shelf. Top shelf
chemist. Kate the chemist. Welcome back
to Star Talk. Thank you for having me. I
love visiting y'all. Oh my gosh. And let
me get your full last name in here. I
don't Does anyone in the world know
this? Bieberdorf. Mhm. Married into
that.
Wow. Just just just don't blame me.
That's it. That is so funny. Married
into that. Wow. Okay. So, is your
husband a scientist? He is a scientist.
We met in grad school. That makes sense.
All right. All right. Uh I think we
talked about him on a previous thing.
Did you meet at University of Texas? We
did. Yeah. I remember that. Good for
you. Yeah. I was high. Okay. what that
was. Okay.
Okay. You are professor for the public
understanding of science. We need more
of those professorships. 100%. Yes. I
know. Uh in England they have several of
those that were funded by uh who was it?
The the one of the Microsoft guys. Uh
well the one in Oxford is the Sim Simon
one. Oh yeah. Yeah. Simony. Charles
Simone. Yeah. He's he's he's a he's a uh
Microsoft billionaire. Yes. Perfect. My
understanding is he also used to date
Martha Stewart. Yes, he did. He dated
her when he went into space. Oh, and had
her make the food for everybody on the
space station at the time. From prison
she may or
the prison stint was short and it was
after that. Uh so Kate, so you're also
an author and your host uh seeking a
scientist. Yes. And do you find them
after you seek them? I do. Yes. I seek
one every time. At least once. Sometimes
at least once and it works every time.
Very glad to hear that. Uh, so you're at
Notre Dame. Yes. Just took this job.
Yeah. And Oh, it's new. Yep. September.
Okay. Well, welcome. Thank you. Yes. Not
welcome. I congratulations. I'll take
it. Yes. Yeah. I was there a few years
ago. Gave a public talk.
Yes. Very proud institution. Do you
teach classes, but they're special
classes? So, I don't teach right now,
but in a couple years, I'll be teaching
science communication courses. So, we're
going to build a science communication
minor and hopefully turn it into a
major. So,
good. Will this be in collaboration with
the communications department a little
bit? So it's a partnership journalism
department. Yes. So the art the arts and
letters program. So both of our colleges
are going to come together and so we'll
take their expertise and the actual
communication our expertise with science
and kind of blend it together. And I
think it's going to be so badly
journalism is so broken and science
might be a way to sort of stitch that a
force to help stitch it back together.
Well, you know, I'm not even sure if
journalism is as broken as we think. I I
believe that people have siloed to an
extent where they can't accept whatever
journalistic uh point of view is being
put forward cuz they can't think crit
critically. So they could just go what
the hell man that's not cool what you
just said there because you know uh I
don't agree with you and that that
becomes the whole argument. Well you
need somebody to fix that right you know
but I think science is a way of of of
actually bridging the gap. Yeah, because
when people learn how science works as a
way of thinking, it changes their entire
life%. So if you got the journalism
department involved, very good. And they
So are you teaching scientists to be
better communicators or journalists to
be better scientists? Both. That that's
clutch, right? We have to do both of
these. That's amazing. So for the
scientist, excuse me, did that word get
bring come into being?
That is I thought it was so fetch, but
I'm just getting past fetch. It's
important. It's so clutch. I love it.
All right. It's necessary. We have to
teach the scientists how to communicate,
right? And that could be a number of
different mediums like podcasts, books,
written, right? Journalism because
because in the science degrees don't
care about that. They don't. We're not
trained in talking to the public in any
medium. We're really not. We're taught
to talk to each other, right? And we're
taught to write in in passive voice,
which I don't know if you've ever read
passive voice. It's boring. It's super
boring. So, if you're trying to connect
with the non-scientist, passive voice is
not the answer, right? You know, but
both are necessary that to be able to
talk to scientists but then be able to
translate to the lay person is what's
really important. And for some reason
it's I don't know how can I put it. Um I
I I don't want to say that it's that
it's counter to the way scientists are
as people. Like my son is right now
studying to become a molecular
biologist. Nice. Okay. When did that
happen? You didn't tell me that. Yeah.
That's what he decided, you know, and he
got a full ride. Yes. You was a father
and he wants to be in molecular biology.
How'd that happen? That's why he wants
to be in it. He looked at my life and
was like, "Oh, no. I I I need something
to get Let me tell you something. Comedy
is not the way to go." But I told him, I
was like, "Dude, that's great. You know,
with your kind of personality, you would
make an excellent communicator for
that." He was like, "Yeah, I don't want
to do that." Oh, yeah. I don't want to
talk I don't I don't want to talk to
people about it. I just want to do it.
And I think a lot of scientists feel
that way. Yeah. I just want to go in the
lab. I just want to do it. I don't want
to talk about it. Yeah. Shut up and get
back to the lab. Exactly. Right. Well, I
mean, as scientists, we have three
categories. The first thing we do is we
ask a question. The middle thing we do
is we seek the answer. We do our
research. And then the last thing is
actually sharing it with the public. But
that's where we drop the ball. We really
don't do it enough. And it takes a
skill. My husband is introverted. He's a
great chemist. He's a great software
engineer, but he would hate to do what I
do. And so, it takes a certain
personality to get out there and put
yourself out there. And you also have to
have a thick skin. People will come
after you for what you say. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. So, so what what we are here
in my office at at the Hayden
Planetarium. What brings you to New
York? Oh, I'm here for a spot on the
Today Show
and so so we're just like it we just
squeezed us in to the
We are a straight up booty call.
You answered. Oh. Oh. Oh.
Wow. So if you're on a Today then you
don't need you're on a Today show then
what do you why you what do you Well, I
like talking to you. Is that the
question? I think that was kind of the
question. It's different, right? So the
Today show you're talking to a certain
audience. It's the American public,
right? And they're usually people who
aren't necessarily signing up for a
science lesson.
Nice idea. You just called our audience
smart. They they are smart. They're
science enthusiasts, right? Wouldn't you
say so? No. No. No. So, no. Very
important point here. We already know
our audience and it's a science
audience. The today's show people tune
in not expecting science. 100%. And then
you you slip that in and now they can
get excited about it. That's the goal.
That's the goal. So, do a little fire, a
little do a little dance and maybe teach
one thing. If I can teach one thing, I
consider it a successful segment. Which
host will you be with on the Today Show?
So, Al Roker, Craig Melvin, and uh Dylan
Dryer. Oh, cool. They always bring You
got to bring in the weatherman because
they know science. And Always. Yeah,
Al's great. He's an actual science
enthusiast. Yes, he is. As is Dylan.
They're both meteorologists, so they
have that science background. And it's
very fun to do stuff with them cuz they
ask the questions, too. They're
interested and they have that science
background. So, they want to push it
just a little bit, which I love. Right.
You need you need the buddy. So, I
probably we probably did this the last
time you came through because I want to
get to the questions we asked because we
have a million questions that our
audience wants to ask you and they all
know you. Yeah, they all know you. So,
yeah. So, just a couple of fast ones
here. When you were a kid, did you like
burn holes in the carpet and and and
explode the kitchen? Like science,
mommy? What What What kind of were you
like girl nerd where this is I got to do
this? Yes and no. U so I was more of an
athlete. I was a soccer player. So, that
was the true love. I was a very uh one
who asked a lot of questions. So, my
parents would count the number of
questions I would ask in a car ride cuz
it drive them nuts. Um my mom was more a
helicopter mom, so there was no
blowtorrch anywhere near me. There's no
chance I would have ever been able to
set something on fire. Wow. Wow. Okay.
But I could see this in a sitcom. the
over curious kid just and mommy daddy
how about daddy and then the car and
then the next scene you're just out on
the street
going just leave you I'm sure they
thought about that I am positive more
more kindly they drop you at a museum
somewhere and then they keep driving on
yes that's perfect okay but so how did
if she's a helicopter mom what freedoms
were did you still have to express
yourself okay so this is where I really
appreciate what she did when I was
younger so she made one bathroom safe
like there were no chemicals like you
know like cleaning chemicals, I should
say. But there was food coloring, there
was shampoo, bath soap, uh bubble bath,
stuff that can't kill you. Stuff that
can't kill you. Put it in this. She had
this big green plastic bowl and it was
like go to town. I will say the food
coloring was removed after the first
time. Were you green at the end of that?
I think so. Food coloring doesn't come
off very easily. Yeah. Well, I've look
at my Instagram, I'll show you. I had my
face was just covered in green food
coloring. Very recently, I had something
go wrong. I just made that up. You're
saying that actually happened? It Oh, it
happens all the time. I did this one
experiment where I intentionally cover
myself in soapy green bubbles. Um, and
it comes right off in the shower. Just
two face washes. You're good. Okay. All
right. I ain't doing that.
I am. You are. I'm willing to. That's
why you are Kate the chemist. Yes,
that's right. I like it. So, Chuck, give
us give us some of our cosmic curiosity.
Let's get right to it then, shall we?
This is Shawn Browning and he says,
"Hello, this is Shawn Browning. I'm
coming from Hood River, Oregon." Hood
River. Yeah. Why does seesium have such
a violent reaction when exposed to
oxygen? And what are some of its
practical uses that the average person
would not know about? Okay, in the
periodic table, the periodic table is
kind of shaped like a U. And so cesium
is in the bottom left hand corner. And
so the bottom left hand corner is where
your biggest atoms are. And so cesium is
really big. And what that means is it
has a very very positively charged core.
its nucleus, but its electrons are very
far away. So, it can barely reach the
electrons. And so, because it's so big
and their charges are so separated,
oxygen, which likes to take electrons
from a neighbor, it is exactly it loves
to steal electrons. It will steal the
electrons. That's a book title, the
electron. The electron thief. I like
that. That's your next book. Okay. We'll
write together.
Yeah. So, it's so it's so big. And so
that's oxygen can come in, grab the
electrons, and the electrons gladly jump
to oxygen because it's much much smaller
and it can eas
I can see it. Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. There it
is. There it is. Okay. So,
so now it reaches for oxygen. What is
the result of that chemical reaction? Is
it exothermic? Endothermic what?
Probably exothermic would be my guess.
It really depends on the situation and
like where their energy levels are. It
will form an ionic salt and so it either
forms seesium oxide or cesium super
oxide. So just either two cesiums and
one oxygen or two oxygen and one cesium.
Um and it forms these two two products
and there that in itself is quite
stable. The oxides usually are. Okay. So
what does it look what does this because
he said violent what does this violent
reaction look like? So my guess is he's
thinking about when you throw these
group one metals into water. So we've
seen this with sodium before if you've
googled that. Love me some sodium and
water. Oh my gosh. So sodium you can cut
it with a knife. It's a metal. Cut it
with a knife. Toss in water. It
basically blows up essentially
definitely. But it's but that's reacting
with water. It is. Or is it the
dissolved oxygen that it's reacting
with? It's the same process is
happening. It's the electrons being
pulled from the group one metal. Got it.
All right. Yeah. And then it's a it's an
exothermic process like you said. So
that will throw it in water. Mhm. So the
other part of the questions you asked
about like what are some things that
people might not know about cesium and
so a cesium 133 I think is used for an
atomic clock and so what happens is you
basically disturb these atoms they give
off a frequency and you can use that
frequency to to measure time and how how
are you exciting the atoms so that it's
a disturbance so usually it's like a
push you want to get it to vibrate and
so it's just you just have to move it a
little bit and that frequency is then
mapped out to keep track of time and
it's so So is it so consistent that it's
you can easily use it like you can set a
clock by it.
Exactly. In fact the duration of the
second is defined by how many cycles of
the cium atom. Okay. So how many
vibrations do you get in a second with
cesium? It's like nine decimal places.
I'm sorry. Oh. So it's that that's why
it's an atomic clock and it's why it's
very precise, right? Because if you got
nine decimal places in 1 second, that's
pretty damn accurate. Yeah. You you're
good for all time. No pun intended.
What? Chuck, stop it.
He's on a roll. He's on a roll. You want
to know how precise this is, right? For
that vibration, for the vibration the
chemist tells us about it is 9
bill192,631,770 cycles of that
vibration. So that vibration is the
exact definition of a second. Of a
second. Yes. There you go. That's cool.
And if I can add to that, if I may,
until that was defined with that
precision, the second was a predefined
fraction of the year 1900. Okay? And so
that involved Earth's rotation around
thing, the rotation of the earth was
built into the definition of the second.
Why wouldn't it be? Because there
60 seconds in a minute, 60 minutes, an
hour. Okay? Why wouldn't it be? Why
wouldn't But that meant if Earth were
slowing down or speeding up, right?
There'd be no way to know that. Exactly.
Because the mechanism that's giving you
the second is changing. So you offload
it onto your CCM atom. Now we say, "Yo,
Earth, what? What?" And so since we
don't need you, Earth, we totally don't
need. Not only that, you're acting up.
So since 19 plus you're slowing down
anyway. Since 1972, we've had to add 20
some 57 leap seconds, right? just to
account for Earth slowing down. It's all
because of your cesium, Adam. Look at
that. My cesium. I love it. I love it. I
don't know any other uses, though. Is
there? Not really. I mean, I'm sure
there's other ones. Uh I mean, let's be
honest. That's enough. That's enough.
What more could you ask for? I mean,
seriously. Measuring time down to a
billionth of a second. Come on. That's
pretty damn good. All right. Hey, Star
Talk fans. I don't know if you know
this, but the audio version of the
podcast actually posts a week in advance
of the video version. And you can get
that in Spotify and Apple Podcast and
most other podcast outlets that are out
there. Multiple ways to ingest all that
is cosmic on Star Talk. Uh Will from
Uklid, Ohio here. Uklid. Uklid. This
town called Uklid. There's a Uklid,
Ohio. I've never heard of it until just
now, but guess what? I'm glad to know
that it's there. Yeah. Uh, he says,
"Most gracious, thanks for using my
question. You probably had this question
a billion times, but I've never heard an
answer to it." So, here it is. We've all
heard by now that the Mentos and Diet
Coke thing. Okay, cool. One, what's the
history and who thought of that? and
two, what causes the chemical reaction
that everybody puts on YouTube to make
the video. Yes, the soda geyser. Okay,
so that went back to about 1910. It was
originally done with those winter green
lifesavers. Say we didn't have Mentos in
1910. We didn't. No, we didn't. So, it
was originally done with the winter life
winter green lifesavers green. I
remember that. Oh, apostrophe green.
Savers are that old. They are. Yeah,
there are. And so they go into the soda
like a soda pop, right? And so it had
that little hole in the center and so it
would make this really neat geyser and
it would come out. But then through the
hole in the middle of the of the
lifesaver. Yep. But then in the 1990s,
the lifesaver company changed the size
of the lifesaver. The science teachers
were upset and they said, "All right,
throw this experiment to the students.
Let's figure out how to replicate this
now that the lifesaver doesn't fit in
there." They did a science some
committed chemist right. Awesome though.
I can totally see high school teachers
just grabbing their students and
grabbing all the candy, all the soda,
and say, "All right, figure out what is
experiment." Exactly. So, what's special
about the surface of a mentos cuz it
doesn't have a hole in it, right? And if
I remember correctly, there's they're
they're solid candies, right? It's solid
candy, but it has these nucleation
sites, these like little divots, and
they attract on the surface. And so, it
attracts the carbon dioxide in the soda.
The carbon dioxide slams into each
other, builds up pressure, and it just
shoots out the top. And then they found
that diet coke has the best reaction cuz
it has the highest carbonation. Okay. I
thought, however, that that's not why
they use diet coke. Oh, please tell me
then if it's otherwise. Okay. I didn't
think that was why. There's part So, one
part is that it doesn't have the sugar
and so it's not as big of a mess for
it's a mess, right? Diet Coke you just
hose up. But sugar then it the the Coke
evaporates and everything is gummed up.
I thought that was the main reason. It
is one of the main reasons. But if you
are on a flight, I don't know if you fly
commercial still, but if you are on a
flight, what are you? Excuse me. I'm on
a subway to get
here. Commercial fancy. I don't know
what you're doing commercial. Okay, for
the rest of us, when we have a flight
attendant go down in a plane, watch
them. When somebody orders Diet Coke,
just watch how they pour it. It takes
way longer for all that carbonation to
sink and for them to top it off. So you
can actually watch it happen right on a
plane ride compared to a non diet like a
like a Mountain Dew or a Coke or
anything. It just has that experiment
that plus at the lower pressure in a
plane there's there's less to press down
on the CO2 anyway so that there's more
bubbling action regardless. Yeah, that's
a good point. I will check that out.
Okay, please do. Please do. All right.
So that means if I have a a a soda maker
machine, a carbonator, whatever those
machines are called, if I cuz I have I
do own one, but I have there are three
settings. There's low, medium, and high.
If I go to high and then repeat that
three times, that's the liquid you want
probably for your experiment. I'm also
going to blow apart your kitchen.
You just made a bomb.
Thank you for saying that. Okay, next.
Andy here from Thousand Oaks. I've heard
the human nose is an incredible chemical
sensor that not only detects very faint
traces of a molecule, but also tens of
thousands of types of molecules. My
question is, do you use this fact in the
science of chemistry to aid in your work
in any way? Or do you generally avoid
smelling experiments due to unknown
noxious effects? I love that. Remind me
because chemistry for me was a long time
ago. You don't actually stick your
nostril on top of the the test tube
100%. So, but there is
this thing so that can dilute it to a
level that you can know whether you
should get closer. Exactly. Yes. So, the
rule number one is do not eat anything
or smell anything or drink anything in
lab. Rule number two is okay, we know
you're going to smell it, so let me
teach you how to do it safely. Yep. It's
wafting. You're pushing the molecules
towards you. If some of the molecules,
yes, some a small portion of them. Um,
but I think part of the question is
asking like, "Do you ever do this and do
you ever use your nose?" I did something
just recently where I had to do this
where people helped me by bringing two
beers out to my my performance stage,
basically my stage table, and they
weren't labeled. One had water, one had
vinegar, and I immediately just stuck my
nose right in there because we can tell
the difference between it, and then I
was able to do the experiment without
any doubt or anything. But you use it,
you use your nose to protect yourself.
It's a way for us to know whether or not
chicken is bad or good or anything like
that. So, it is a tool that you can use
if you're safe about it in the chemistry
lab. Is there anything that smells good
that will also kill you? Ooh, I'm sure.
Or or has that gene pool been removed
from our species long ago? Hilarious. I
That's a fair question. It is a fair
question, right? Yeah. I am sure there
is something that smells good that will
kill us. I can't think of anything off
the top of my head right now. Do you
have one in mind? No, but I have the
opposite, which is we know that hydrogen
sulfide, okay, is especially deadly at
some level well below the level that we
can detect it. So when you smell it, you
say, "This is nasty. I'm going to go in
the opposite direction." It was still
far from killing you, but anyone who's
But you know what? Hydro sulfite is like
rotten eggs. Fart fart. Okay. I was
going to say rotten eggs, but fine.
Everybody knows fart. You're a comedian.
You can do a fart joke. I listen that
that's the first time I got in trouble
in
chemistry, right? We made we made we had
hydrogen sulfide and we and I took it
and put it in a eye dropper and went
around and putting it on people so they
would smell like farts. You did that? I
did. Yes, I did. And I got the teacher
said, "You know, you should be a trouble
for it." Did you really? I did. Yes. You
should You should be a comedian. That's
what they said. And I wouldn't have
gotten in trouble for it if I had just
kept it to the dog on students, but I
had to get aggressive. So, so anyway,
yeah. So, there's a uh there's a
suspicion in our evolutionary past that
uh there's a there's an idea that
hydrogen sulfide can build up in the
bottom of the ocean if the ocean uh
oxygen cycle stops. Then you have
anorobic life forms, okay? And hydrogen
sulfide is one of the byproducts of
them. And if it builds up to a big
enough bubble, it'll come up. And if
you're on the shore when that happened
and you liked the smell of farts, you
would go to it and just die. And if you
sort of didn't care, you died. If you if
you didn't like it, you went to the
hills. And so the argument is this
happened with some frequency in the
history of our species. Interesting.
That it was built into us. That's
interesting. I hadn't heard that before.
That's interesting. So all the uncles
that said pull my finger ended up dead.
that somehow we still do that. Somehow
there evolution. It's never the ant that
does it. It's just the uncle. So it's
it's it's the the guy gene that carried
it forward. All right. All right. Give
me some more. This is John. He says,
"Hello, Dr. Tyson. Dr. Kate Lord Nice."
John here from Arkansas. I used to teach
high school chemistry, but I still All
right. Teacher applause. Uh, but I still
struggle with electron configurations,
especially in the transition metals.
What is it about that section of the
periodic table that makes it so dogone
convoluted? Yeah. And why are they
called transition metals? Cuz the edges
we they they're pretty clean clean. We
can understand them. You got the gases,
the noble gases, and you got the, you
know, and you go to the middle and the
the their representation on the table is
different. Yes. Right. And you have and
these others that are a series, then
they pull those out. What's What's up
with that? What's up with that? So, one
of the reason make that cleaner for the
rest of us so we can learn it. I can
try. Um, so one of the reasons why
transition metals are called transition
metals is because they go through
different color changes. And so you can
actually see them transition through
their oxidation states. And so maybe
they're a plus two or a plus three. You
can see the color change across the
table. Okay. Yeah. So you could just sit
there and watch your reaction go from
I'll just make up some colors. some blue
to green to red and you're watching it
go through different oxidation states so
you can actually monitor it. So in
organic chemists, which is what I do, we
usually like color changes and that's
one of the reasons why we're drawn to
that field is because we work with
transition metals in high school and
also what I taught which is general
chemistry. So the first year of college
chemistry um we do general trends and so
we say if something is like this it will
operate like this. We just try to
identify trends and so the S block and
the P block so the outside areas of the
periodic table they really follow these
trends but the middle the D block the
transition metals don't really follow
the trends. sound like prison. Are you
in D block? What are you getting now?
Okay. And so and so that's what's hard
about teaching it, especially in high
school, because there are no like
typical trends you can go by. Gotcha. No
general rules. So there are general
trends that you can go by. Um and
there's certain ones that always break
rules like your jewelry metals. So
copper, silver, and gold will always
they're I'm going to nerd out on you,
but they're usually D9, but because of
the way the electrons fall, they go to
D10. And so they can just redistribute
their electrons. I cannot get as excited
about that as I'm sorry, but it's it's
an explanation of why sounds like a boy
band, right? Oh, it does. I used to be
in D9, but now I'm in D10. No, it's the
inorganic flaring. We talk about our d
orbitals and where our electrons are.
And so, I just love that part. And it's
just where your electrons sitting. They
move around to be stable. If you have,
let's say you have five orbitals,
there's 5 d orbitals. If you have two
electrons in each one, we all knew that
five d orbs. You all knew it. Yeah, we
totally knew that. If you have two
electrons in each one, that provides
stability. But if you have two two two
and then one, it's less stable. And so
what it does is it takes another
electron and move it over here to
provide stability. And so these specific
atoms like copper and silver and uh gold
will do that just naturally. And that's
why it can be confusing for high school
students because you don't usually teach
these exceptions. And for grown-ups. And
for grown-ups. Yeah. For everybody.
True. But he's a high school teacher. So
there pull it back. Yeah. Okay. Cool.
Cuz in
astrophysics, nine out of 10 atoms in
the universe is hydrogen. Yeah. And
there's nothing easier than the hydrogen
energy levels. And we don't even have to
think about orbitals. There's just
there's just a layer. Just there's just
levels and the electron moves back and
forth. But when you have all of these
electron clouds, it gets way more
complicated. Realistically described,
but complicated. Yeah, it's it's really
hard because you have to figure out how
the orbitals are actually going to
overlap. Are they going to be
complimentary? Will it be bonding,
non-bonding, antib-bonding? There's all
these different there are molecules in
space and we have to but then they're
sort of astrochemists at that level. I I
can I can do most of my astrophysics
completely ignoring that. It turns out
that's kind of interesting. Yeah. Not to
not to say that
have to leave right now. I that would
that was not meant as a as Yeah. Okay.
Chuck, what else you have? All right.
This is Mi Date, I think. Uh Mihir says
this. Hey, Kate Neil Chuck. Uh, there
are books on complex topics like quantum
physics for babies. How effective do you
think these books are? Should graduate
level science topics be introduced
formally at the elementary level in an
engaging and understandable way? The
cool experiments seen in school provide
mon momentary excitement, but they don't
leave a lasting impact. Books, however,
might. By high school age, the kids ship
has already sailed. Grab their attention
while you can. I say so. So, so tell us
about your books first. Okay. I have
seven children's books. Five of them are
about a little Kate the chemist. She's
10 years old. Runs her neighborhood. Was
this a shill? No. Was this a plant? No,
I didn't. But I do. That's your mother.
Her
mother. Thanks, Mom. Is that Teresa? Is
that Go ahead. I have five five fiction
books. I have two non-fiction books and
I have one for adults. It's called It's
Elemental. So, I just write to try to
share science with the general public
and try to make it fun. So, are the kids
books doing what you want them to do?
Yeah. Yeah, definitely. Because there
the two non-fiction books are each have
25 experiments that you can do at home
with materials you probably already have
in your craft drawer. And so, what I
want them to do is for parents to pick
up that book and use it over spring
break and do science experiments with
their kids. Okay, there you go. That's
cool. That works. I love that. Okay. So,
and it seems to me, yes, I think an
experiment can be lasting. Not contrary
to the claim of the question, an
experiment, yes, it comes and goes, but
it can trigger curiosity. Yes. That
whether or not you fully understood the
chemical uh uh reactions that made it
happen, you just don't forget it. Right.
And then, and so I I think educators
overvalue the lesson plan relative to
the inspiration. I think so too and I
research actually supports what you're
saying too but it it also is that you
can have a connection with the
scientists. So if you show up one time
and do an explosion okay fine maybe
you'll spark the interest but if you
keep going back and you form a
connection with the students and you you
form that bond that's when you can
actually make a difference and so
showing up really does have value. Yes.
But can I push back on the quantum what
is it quantum physics for babies? You
said quantum physics for babies how
effective do you think astrophysics for
babies? But there's a series of these
books. But what do they mean by babies?
They're not talking about actual babies.
They're board books that you can flip
through and so they're really small. But
I think those are primarily for the
parents who can't read another book
about the the cow goes moo. And so it's
intellectually stimulating for the
parents. They can be better parents. Uh
but at the end of the day, exposing kids
to all this vocabulary is just good. So
that when they get to the science class,
they've been exposed. They're not
hearing the word molecule for the first
time. They already have a general
understanding of what it is. Maybe.
Maybe Hunter here from Columbus,
Georgia. We saw Neil a few weeks ago. I
was just there gave a public talk in
Columbus, Georgia. I wanted to ask Kate
a question about the periodic table if
the island of stability is real. What
kind of properties do you think we might
be able to expect from atoms in it? Oo.
So, were you talking about the island of
stability, Neil, or or they just wanted
to point out that they saw you a couple
weeks ago? Yeah. So, this is something
that I think is really interesting
because as a chemist, I'm familiar with
the band of stability, but the island of
stability is a little bit outside of my
reach. So, can I do band and then I
throw to you for island? Sure. Unless
they're the same thing and we just call
them something different. Yeah. What's
your band of stability? So, the band of
stability basically, which is another uh
boy band name. We The band of stability
actually that would be Cold Play. Okay.
All right.
Okay. Kate, got it.
The band the band of stability is all
about um figuring out what ratio of
neutrons to protons makes an atom most
stable. And so if you have 20 protons or
fewer the ratio is 1 one. If you have
more than 20 protons that number alters
a little bit. And so for uh chemistry
specifically atoms you have 1.5 neutrons
to every one proton. That gives you your
most stable atom. So that's how I think
about it. Where does the island of
stability come in? Is that an extension?
Oh yeah. So okay so uh I can only tell
you how I have come to learn it and we
can maybe dovetail with what you
described above a certain atomic number.
Mhm. The nucleus is so large and every
one of them are unstable. You can ask
well what makes a stable element? Is it
stable forever or or just for a few
years or a few minutes? Right? So there
might be some practical definition of
what we call stable but for our purposes
all those big atoms do not live for long
and the ones we're discovering you know
101 102 103 which is the limit of the
table when I was in school uh 103 was
laorencium I think it was or still is
still is still thank you it turns out
that the calculations for the stability
of the nucleus when you go beyond the
ones we're currently discovering into
the 120s 30. Somewhere in there, and I
forgot the exact range, somewhere in
there is an island of stable, very heavy
elements. Oo. And so you have to get
past the unstable ones. Typically, you
make another element by cramming protons
and or neutrons into a pre-existing
Californiaifornium. You you slam
California into a different other one.
Yeah, exactly. You're slamming unstable
elements into other unstable element.
See if another unstable element shows
up. And some of them live for thousandth
of a second. So if you if you slam
californium into Alabama,
you definitely going to come up with
something
unstable. Bam. I tell you, I can't
believe they came over here like they
did.
Alamium.
Oh, you got me with that one. Yeah.
Well done, liberals. I tell you, it'll
be the color purple, though.
See, that's how you get out of that. So,
so this has been described in physics as
an island of stability which we are all
just our appetite is wetted for it
because if you have a new element that
is stable what are you going to do with
it? What how how what properties does it
have? And that all happens to in the on
the chemical side not the physics side.
Yeah. Right. So with the island of
stability then are we saying that it's
because I know like or whatever lasts
for less than a second right? So are we
saying so organisms? So that's the 118.
18. That's the highest one we know about
right now. The highest numbered one.
Yeah. Um so I guess what I'm curious
about is then would these atoms then
stay around for are we talking seconds?
Are we talking years? Like what do we
think? My again my understanding is that
they're permanently stable. But what it
would mean is your your rules either
have a new manifestation in those
heavier nuclei uh or somehow that rule
shows up again. Okay. But I we're all I
can't wait till we get there. Right. I'm
really intrigued by that cuz I'm curious
if it's just like relative stability
where it lasts maybe a second still or
instead of a thousand of a second.
Right. Right. Yeah. You couldn't still
have a wad of it in your hand. That's
what I'm curious about. Right. As am I.
as am I. Have you ever wanted one of
your questions on the universe answered?
We all have questions about the
universe. From black holes to quazars,
quantum entanglement, wormholes, there
is no end to the depths of cosmic
curiosity. Well, the entry level of
Patreon membership with Star Talk gets
you just that. I think it starts at $5 a
month. you have access to the question
line that reaches our Cosmic Query
programming. And not only that, we
produce a special Cosmic
Queries installment just for Patreon
members. If you weren't the director of
the Hayden Planetarium, what do you
think you would be doing? Okay, but this
had to be another universe. It wouldn't
happen in this universe. Okay. I'd be
I'd be a a songwriter for Broadway
musicals. Oo. So that's the entry level
and the perks ascend from there. Uh
there's a level in fact where we send
you an autographed copy of one of my
latest books. Uh right now it's Starry
Messenger Cosmic Perspectives on
Civilization. And it's signed with my
fancy fountain pen with purple ink. So I
invite you to just check the link below.
And all of that money goes to our
ability to experiment with new ways of
bringing the universe down to earth. So,
thank you for those who have already
joined and we welcome others to
participate in this grand adventure of
what it is to bring the universe down to
earth. As always, keep looking up. This
is Jessica. Hello, Dr. Tyson, Lord Nice,
and Dr. Kate. This is Jess from Toronto
and Dubai. Well, lie dah.
Jessica anyway.
She says people show off where they've
been.
Let
them listen. You got it. I haven't been
to Dubai, so I'm going to give it to
you. I'm probably the only person here
who hasn't been to Dubai. I haven't been
to Dubai. Okay. Okay. I've been several
times. Well, we knew that.
Well, D.
So uh in space where there's no oxygen
and gravity is minimal, how do chemical
reactions, especially combustion change
at the atomic level? Could studying
these reactions in a vacuum reveal new
insights into quantum effects like wave
function behavior in molecule bound
bonding or energy transfer? And quantum
mechanics says everything is
probabilistic. Is there a tiny chance my
candle would light just to mess with me?
Thank you, Neil. And I love you. And by
the way, that's the different kind of
probabilistic. So go ahead. So we should
separate into two areas. There's what
are you doing with no air, but you have
two molecules that might perhaps know
about each other's existence quantum
mechanically through through
entanglement. Maybe that was a little
bit in there. The other one is just in
zero G. In zero G combustion is fun.
Tell tell us about that. Well, what's
interesting about in zero G is that all
of our reactions behave like gasphase
reactions because we don't have gravity,
right? And so we are we get to kind of
do stuff that we couldn't do on Earth,
we can do it up in space because you can
move things around. They expand more.
Like a a pencil would never float around
here on Earth. It would stay at the
bottom of a beaker, right? Same thing.
Whereas if you're trying to put pencils
in beers, well, I'm just I'm just trying
to give a solid because if I give just a
random molecule, people might not know,
but you can visualize a pencil in a
beaker, right? Pencil molecule. a
pentlecule. Yes. It's staying at the
bottom of a beaker. We know where it's
going to sit. It's going to be at the
bottom. It will have interaction. Yeah.
The whole time. But when we go to space
now, it moves around. So, we have solids
that essentially get to behave like a
gas. And so, the chemistry is just
different and you get to look at it. Um,
my question is, do we have combustion
reactions outside of Earth and outside
of the International Space Station? I
mean, do we we have to have oxygen to
have combustion, right? Yeah. Yeah. So,
so I guess um what I was really
referring to, which was accurately
portrayed in the movie Gravity, okay,
there was a small fire that began. Mhm.
And they just let it go and it
extinguished
itself because normally on Earth where
there's
1g, the heated gas rises, right,
bringing fresh oxygen in to continue the
combustion create. Yes. But here it's
just it ate up the oxygen. No more
oxygen in town and the the this the CO2
whatever the byproducts can't feed the
flame and it snuffed it out. Wow. So you
can't burn a candle in zero G is the
point unless you have a gentle breeze.
Right. You have to have something moving
more uh oxygen molecules that way into
it. Right into it. That's so cool.
Right. Right. So So that means I did not
know that. So you didn't know that. I
love that. Which way? That is so you
cannot be romantic in space.
So, so anything that combusts it, it
assumes that it's just moving through
the material to burn the whole thing,
right? A piece of paper burns the whole
and it's and we take it for granted.
It's relying on hotter gases being less
dense and rising. Yeah. Right. So, do
you ever try to think about those
experiments? I have not really thought
about it because all of my chemistry
happens on Earth and I'm terrified of
leaving Earth and so that's usually
where I stop. I just love that chemistry
I do is on Earth. Okay. No, but if we
needed you for space to consult, I'd say
call someone else there. It's not
happening. There you go. I don't do
that. That scares me. I wouldn't go to
space. No. No. I don't know why that's
my line. It just scares me. I don't want
to. I don't want You're flying in a
plane. You're like, "Oh, halfway to a
rocket." I don't I don't know. No, no,
but in plane, you still have one G,
right? Okay. All right. What I think
about though is how you could do
different experiments in space. Like you
can do the experiments of a womb because
you can kind of replicate that and how
how the baby moves around with not in
zero gravity, but they have that vibe,
right? They're able to float around. So,
you can do those type of experiments in
space. That's what I think about, right?
Okay. And so, there's some reactions.
What's a reaction that could only happen
in in in zero g? I'm curious. Well, not
only, but there's certain ways you could
do it because I could think about taking
two different like solutions and have
the drops come and collide with each
other that you wouldn't be able to do on
and create these many reactions right
there as they're floating. That's
amazing. And just what have that unfold
right in front of you? So, solid
rockets. Could you do it inside like
what what's in the solid rockets? Solid
fuel. No. No, it isn't. Yes, it is. It's
a combination of No, no. The solid
rocket boosters. Yes. You can go in
there and like bang on the fuel. It's
It's solid. That's why it's called solid
rockets. That's why they call solid
rockets. No, but generally there's
another tank that can be That's what I'm
talking about. That Oh. Oh, okay. That
tank. Yes. That has hydrogen and oxygen,
right? So, liqufied, which is way denser
than air. Okay. And then you take the
hydrogen, oxygen, and so now take us
from there. I got a tank twice as big
holding liquid hydrogen and half that
size holding liquid oxygen. And you got
to keep it really cold because they're
liquefied, right? And that's why if you
ever see the launch, you ever see you
ever see slow-mo rocket launches from
Florida, you see this chunks of ice
falling off the rocket that Florida is a
moist environment and the rocket is cold
and it just all the moisture gathers on
it. If you do that in a desert, you're
not going to have condensation freezing
on it. Right. Cool. Okay. So, tell me
what's happening when you combine
because in the subject of space, you
have liquid hydrogen to liquid oxygen.
And I just wave my hands and say yes, it
makes water and there's energy. But take
me into that. So, a traditional
combustion reaction, traditional, not
what you're talking about, has a source
of fuel that has carbon associated with
it. You treat it with oxygen and you
produce water and carbon dioxide. What's
really neat about that would give you
energy. Yeah. And it releases energy.
It's exothermic. That's anything that
burns basically. Anything organic that
burns. Yes. And that's why it turns
black when it's done because it lays
bare the carbon. Yes. Yes. Okay.
Perfect. But when you remove the carbon,
you can have a combustion reaction
that's much cleaner. And so that's when
you what you're talking about. So you
have hydrogen plus oxygen will give us
water. It'll still be combustion. Still
be combustion. But but that that more uh
a cleaner kind. So that the exhaust of
that rocket is
Water. Water. There you go. There you
go.
We did it. That's awesome. That's very
neat. So, do you think in quantum
physics two molecules can see each other
before they make contact? See each other
in a way that they say, "I want to get a
little closer to you." I mean, I always
I the music
I in my mind all chemistry is driven
around the rearranging of atoms and
that's all driven by electrons either
electron repulsion or attraction. So
that's how I think about interactions is
where are the electrons? Are they
attracted to each other? What would be
cool is if two entangled particles
made an entangled molecule. Wouldn't
that be weird? Whoa. That it would be
wild. So So that would be
weird. One molec one quantum molecule
with its bits separated, right? That'd
be so weird. That would be weird. But
they have to be identical. Mhm. So maybe
a hydrogen makes a molecule H2. A lot of
oxygen, not nitrogen. We breathe O2 and
N2. So they're quantum entangled to make
one molecule. That's a sci-fi story
right there. It is. Wow. Be really
weird. Super cool. Okay. All right. All
right. Here we go. This is Alyssa. But
you're Kate the Earth Chemist, so that's
not a future book coming out of you. All
right. Alyssa Feldos says this. Hello,
Alyssa from Rocket City Hunts Alabama.
My daughters Amelia and Olivia just love
you. Uh, my question is, what is the
biggest, most impressive kid-friendly
experiment I can do with a four and
8-year-old that will keep them
interested in science for years to come?
We love a good bang and aren't afraid of
getting dirty. Wow. Okay. That that's
that's full cart blanch there. That's a
loaded one cuz four-year-olds getting
with a bang. It makes me nervous. But um
I think if you have adults involved, you
could do the exploding paint can
experiment, which is really fun. Sounds
good. So,
you know, hey, when a four-year-old is
an adult,
some paint what the way she said. Yeah.
Everybody knows the exploding paint can.
I I picture it that they could help you
set it up and then the adult would
actually trigger the reaction. So, it's
very simple. You just need a paint can,
empty, never had paint in it before. Put
about an inch of baking soda at the
bottom. Take a cup, plastic cup, uh,
fill it with vinegar, food coloring if
that's your flavor. And then nestle the
cup into the baking soda. Into the
vinegar. Into the vinegar. Yep. In the
liquid. And then you can put the, uh,
cup of vinegar into the baking soda. So
like nestle it in like a sand castle.
Then you're going to put the lid on the
paint can. Use a mallet to hammer it
shut. You want it completely shut. No
place for gas to escape. Now get the
kids out of there. They can go far away.
Put their safety goggles on. Then adults
also with safety goggles on. Always
safety goggles. Yeah. Shake it up, but
keep your head back because what will
happen is a neutralization reaction.
You'll release carbon dioxide just like
we were talking about earlier with the
Mentos and Diet Coke. Yep. Exactly. And
then the lid flies up. It's really
colorful. It's cute. Wait a minute. But
why doesn't you have to sit it down
afterwards, right? You can't hold that
thing. Yeah, you should put it down.
Yeah, good point. Well, how do you know
when it's about to blow up? It happens
very fast. So, what I do is I go shake,
shake, shake, and I slam it down on the
table and then I step back and then I
move on to my next one. And while I'm
shaking my second one, the first one
goes off. Wow.
So why doesn't So I thought paint can
lids were stronger than that. You know,
I think paint can lids are tight,
especially if you mallet it shut, but
apparently not. It's no match for CO2.
Exactly. Cuz it's not secured. It's not
locked in. And so it's not clamped.
Exactly. So if you have all those CO2
molecules coming in going on that lid,
it will shoot it straight up in the air.
It's very fun. Wow. I love that one. And
that happens in seconds. Yeah. And the
only reason why you put it in a in a
small plastic cup is to keep it separate
long enough to hit the lid. Exactly.
Because otherwise you it will escape.
All all the expanding gas will escape
before you get to mallet it down. So
when you nestle it in like that, you
keep everything separate. You mallet it
down. Now you mix it. Bang. And and you
throw it up first. So the liquid's going
to go up and then it all slams down at
one time. And so when you shake it, it
actually really nicely distributes the
vinegar all over. It grabs that baking
soda and then you get the cool acid
based neutralization reaction. All
right. Very pumpy. Keep your head back.
Keep your head back cuz you could get
hit in the face. Yeah. See, I'm going to
let my kid do that. How old is your kid?
This is the money
maker. I don't care how old the kid is.
It don't matter.
Can't have a panc blown up in this.
Like, sorry, baby. This is what pays
this is what pays the mortgage. So you
shake that can and put it down as
quickly as possible. But you can't
overstate the need for goggles for all
your only your experiments. Yeah. I
usually wear goggles, a lab coat, and
gloves. It is a little overkill
sometimes, but I like to set a good
example. It would break my heart if a
kid got injured doing something they
watch me do. Gotcha. Gotcha. All right.
Hello, Dr. Tyson and Dr. Beverdorf and
Lord Nice. James from Denmark here. What
would you say are the most promising
developments in applied chemistry today?
Oh man. Do you
claim material scientists in your
community? Oo, I do. Yeah, because
that's chemistry. It's all chemistry.
All chemistry and it's usually a branch
of inorganic chemistry as well. So I I
bailey wick. Yes, that's my favorite.
Those guys are awesome. So what's on the
horizon there? Oh, there's so many
different things right now. One of the
things I'm really interested in is how
we are bonding with AI and we're kind of
trying to use it to to help us. And so
one thing that I just read is that they
asked Microsoft AI you um what could we
do to replace lithium in our our lithium
ion batteries and it took a week but it
came up with an answer and so now we are
able hamsters and a hamster wheel.
That's thank you AI for that brilliance.
Exactly. But so now we have an answer.
We can use it and go troubleshoot and
see if that will work. And so what I'm
really interested right now is how those
two worlds are kind of merging together
and how we can use that to do better
research and more effective research.
And so that's that's what's happening
right now and I am really excited about
that. That's what AI is best at. Yeah.
So
AI think it's fascinating. Looking at
molecules is easy for AI. It's like, you
know, well, it has a lot of information
that it can pull together everything and
and it can think in terms of I use the
term think it can think in terms of
future combinations that we could never
even get to. We would not have time to
get to it because it can calculate them
all at once. Aren't there books that
have all the chemical potentials of all
reactions or Oh, are you talking about
the CRC? Yes, you know, I have one. It's
a huge book. What is that? Oh, what does
that stand for? Uh, something rubber
company. I mean, consolidated rubber
company. Is that true? So, there are
these compilations of all these
properties that have been discovered
peacemeal and assembled into these
volumes. Any scientist, we have a CRC on
our shelves. So, that whoever that
company was, they decided to compile all
the information you could ever want in
science. There you go. Okay. You know
what I did? I found at auction u a a CRC
from my birth year. So I bought it. So
that that is a that is a slice in time
of what we knew about the chemistry, the
physics, the bi. It is all science in
there including math. Okay. So so here's
the the point. It's a thousand pages. I
it would take me a lifetime to read
through it. But AI could ingest it and
come up with two minutes chemicals. Why
wouldn't couldn't it? Right. It's it's
the best of both worlds, right? Because
you you list I is it is the word
chemical potential? What is the the how
the likelihood that two atoms will come
together? What do you what's the well
atoms or electrons? Cuz potential outer
electrons. Yeah. Usually potential when
we're talking about that activation
potentials or whatever. Sure. Activation
energies. Energies. So they know it. So
the book has it. But you're not going to
sit there and read a thousands of thing
and come up with a new molecule. Let it
do it. But let it do it while you out on
the beach sipping a pinina cola. And
then you get a notification on your
phone. I found that new
you've been looking for. And then you
say, "Ai, write the paper. Publish it."
It's like the best grad student you
could have. Yeah. It's so funny. All
right. It's been said primarily because
it's basically true that there's no
understanding of chemistry without
physics. And there's no understanding of
biology without chemistry. And so I come
to the table as a physicist. So when I
look at the world, I see the interaction
of matter, motion, and energy. The
biologist sees the interaction of all
life. Yet the chemist is situated
between those
two. Because to go from inorganic
molecules to self-replicating life,
there's some complex chemistry
involved. In fact, biology is the most
complex form of chemistry we know.
But it's not only that. It's everything
around us. Everything is made of atoms
and molecules. And we take it so much
for granted that somebody at some point
in our past thought about that what
those atoms would do when they were
brought together to make a solid object,
to make a liquid object, to make rocket
fuel, to make th those those ice packs
that you shake and put on your injury.
One of them turns cold, the other turns
hot. A chemist was in the middle of
that. So I don't think we spent enough
time paused in reflection of what role
chemistry and the chemists who are
behind it all have done for
civilization. And that's a cosmic
perspective. I think that's all the
time. Okay, you got to come back more
often. Thank you for having me. I love
that. Oh my gosh. So you and your
podcast is seeking a scientist. Seeking
a scientist. And that's with NPR. It's
with NPR. Yeah. Out of KCR. It's out of
Kansas City. Excellent. And And you
interview other scientists. Yes. And you
engage them with their expertise. And
you bring your chemistry uh patina to it
perhaps. Yes. I definitely try to bring
the science communicator out of the
people I interview because not all of
them would necessarily be communicators.
Yeah. And and do kind of like what you
and I do where we feed off each other
and kind of fact check a little bit.
Yeah, have the same kind of conversation
and so it's just it's really nice to
feature scientists that might not
normally get featured and I love that.
There you go. Kate Bieber. Well, thanks
for stepping through. Uh congratulations
on your new gig at at University of
Notredam.
Yeah, the Fighting Irish. Fighting
Irish. Yeah, there it is. All right,
we'll look to and try to come back more
often. I will. Thank you so much. I
appreciate it. It's always fun talking
to you guys. Oh, yeah. All right, Chuck.
Always good to have you, man. Always a
pleasure. This has been Star Talk Cosmic
Queries the Chemist's edition. Until
next time, as always, keep looking up.
[Music]